do you scale the reviewing process? now that is blocking your senior It burns them out. One answer don't do any code reviews at all. is Florian Butau, AI engineer at and we discuss the biggest in software engineering right code reviews. [music] do you think of Spectre and Which of these guardrails you the most value? Does it matter harness I use, GitHub Copilot, Code, Codex? [music] matters immensely. Basically, what are doing is they they give a hand grenade, which is AI, and then say don't blow up the grenade, but use it. is how the best engineers are the code review bottleneck right the full episode. we generate more code, this is really the build phase, code reviewing a bottleneck. just come back from Google I/O, was last week. I think when this comes out, a couple weeks ago. even there, Google and the people acknowledge, yeah, code review is bottleneck, and we don't know how to it yet. Google's an interesting case um in 2025, they already that 50% of their code is AI and then they're pushing for always like to look at the big players see what they do because on one side, see all of these crazy numbers, like gains, um or automated our entire deployment layer AI, like Spotify did, for example. very seldom do you actually see how do that, right? So, they report all these gains, then how do you translate that to own work? that part is often missing. um for the big companies, I think um if you if you look a little bit how um you know, what they publish what they write, can kind of see that they they have a approach that reviewing now more, like it more standardized they've identified that um now you can generate code very cheaply, know, um the bottleneck is moving else. Now, some people and is another thing, but some people argue that code was never the bottleneck. on kind of, you know, how do you software engineering? truth of the matter is you generate more code. So, now you have more on your reviewing. On your etc. I think what the big companies are right now is they are combating with on reviews. Amazon for example, there have been instances where there were outages, loss. Due to your AI AI code and then they put in in place where they now require parts of the code or parts of the systems that they have be reviewed by senior engineers anything gets merged or deployed. they are identifying that, you know, in some cases AI generated code has be scrutinized well than in other cases. you can see that and at the same you see other companies who say, we automated our entire PR review They're playing like these um would you say? Well, I like to think it as a little bit like a horizontal way of scaling AI and a vertical one. horizontal one is where you automate processes you currently have like a review. Like you can you can say any that is created automatically with Copilot for example. that's what a lot of companies do. then they don't really talk about that improves the quality. So, they're automating part of human pipeline that we have. then the vertical axis? vertical axis is you have um project and a small specialized team you let them build their own tooling make sure that the product ships um is developed in the way that they to. they are more involved in building um environments for their agents and for the team to the software. they don't have a blueprint that the product automatically. They it. And this is the see us stacking a lot of capabilities, We have the model on one hand, then the agent of harness around the model and you're talking about environment in which this agent operates. Or how should I view maybe maybe we should go back one step. Um if you look at software engineering, think it's a well-established process now, like if we think before the area AI. software development life cycle, knows it. Um of Well, the review was done by and it would work because code delivered faster than you could it. That has changed now with AI. so, the question now becomes, well, do you scale the reviewing process? Because now that is blocking your engineers. It burns them out. Um studies about that where, you cognitive death is growing, but don't understand or their own base they just don't have the time to at everything, or they don't even to look at the AI-generated code, so, the the question is, how do you that? um one answer is, don't do any code at all. Okay, but then the next is, how do you do that? I think way to do it is to engineer the in which the agents operate um intention, so that you don't have be the human in the loop to give the feedback on common things. it starts with very simple things. um like I'll just let's say code automatic code formatter. We had that. Or a security check, know, lots of team has integrated like SonarQube or something that you feedback that then a human would take and uh the code with like with the feedback those systems. can do that automatically. So, if provide agents feedback on what doing wrong hopefully as close as possible to the agent actually generates the [clears throat] means on the laptop, not necessarily in you made your commit or your PR. you are suddenly in this world of you're trying to engineer feedback the agents in a way that helps the to run for a long time without intervention. that's what I mean by building these of environments. I think it's very easy to get with it. lot of it will feel like we've been doing this before. now you're giving the agent that You're not taking it as a anymore. of the models are surprisingly good self-correcting themselves once you them what they did wrong. let the environment give them that Does the harness in this equation it matter which harness I use? Copilot, Cloud Code, CodeX? yeah, absolutely. in my experience the harness more than the model. mean the harness is what provides the what provides type of prompting, the memory layer, and all of things then get submitted to the LLM to a response for example where LLM, you know, wants make a tool call, etc. And the provides them the capability to the tool call for the LLM. matters immensely. made an experiment in one of my where I tried to a tool based on specifications tests. So, I had a full suite of like specification-driven like many people like to do They The idea is that you specify your product exactly the AI will be able to implement The exactly according to is unfortunately not true. Uh but an attempt that I made and that And then I thought, okay, what I use the TDD idea and just generate me of the behavioral tests up front. then let that be the feedback to the who tries to follow my depending on the harness that I it worked or didn't work even if I using the top frontier model in both Which which harness gave you the results? that keeps changing all the time. at that time it was a Claude code. now I would have said I would say it shifted to Codex for implementation Um but that's one of those things. like a moving target, which is one of the reasons why you can't stop experimenting. There's this for software engineers to try um things and make it a process okay, this those are now the rules. don't think that works. Things are moving too quickly. maybe I should walk that back a bit. It works at some level, but you define in your policy we must use Claude code. who knows what will happen when the release comes out. might behave completely different, the models have different {unquote} personalities. some are very good at instruction others are very good at in the gaps if you don't provide context as a human. So you need be careful uh which model you use as I want to zoom in on kind of what recommend for harnesses, but before do of following your train of thought spectrum development and solving kind the the code review process in that you mentioned the TDD approach better than the spectrum approach with a model instructions in that way. I would say well, spectrum was my attempt and that didn't go well. was a typical okay, I create the prompt then the model does something I didn't intend. when you give those the feedback in to tell the model when it's off worked for me in that particular and I would say, you know, those might be transferable to other but it really depends on the which again brings us back to quest to the to the need to be uh to willing to experiment what works. And this feedback, just so I this is in an automated way, So you have specs, then you have and it the feedback is not telling what it did wrong, but what that feedback cycle look like? exactly, yeah. So um in if when using like these CLI tools, um have the ability to uh define is called, for example, a stop So when the agent is done with its harness triggers uh an event, which a stop hook. And uh you can wire that to a shell script that you run, for So you can automate running test suite or your guide rails. Uh like to call them guide rails. um then and you need to engineer your rails so they actually output like language text. This is do it in this and that way. you base the feedback encodes the that you would write as a human. then you trigger that, and then that uh the LLM to continue um on the thing. And you can pair, know, these feedbacks that you give um things like Ralph loop, um know, Codex and Claude, they now the goal um command, which really they will just keep running for long long until they fix the issue. So Ralph loops specifically allow to run whatever you want to do in a right? So it goes over it, and feedback mechanism would then be in an iteration to get it right to correct it. Goal is something the idea is the same. idea is the same. Um I don't know exactly what the of goal looks like, but seems to be functionally equivalent a Ralph loop. which of these guardrails that put in place gave you the most You mentioned linting already security controls. Do you have more yeah, so I'm I'm I didn't know but I've since become a great of semantic grep. because it allows you to um put uh for things that it could catch code. For example, certain type of construct. the example that I always give is um don't want any default values in any my methods in Python, for example. know, you can set default values um parameters in Python methods. And in signature of the method. And um in my experience, is one of the sources of frustration you have to review and debug the later. So, I just that by putting a rule that these uh code patterns. that then triggers um error. Um you must not write it in that way. It's policy. so, semantic grep is really flexible I uh interrogate the AI um the code that it wrote, instead of the code myself, you know, of these issues come up. You know, did you do it that way? It doesn't any sense. immediately triggers me, okay, add another guardrail rule for particular uh type of pattern. what then happens time is you're you're shaping your you're iterating towards it be tighter and tighter to be aligned your uh preferences as a human or you think code should look like. part of that is not only taste, um also want to enforce that the AI code that is easy to not for humans, even if you want to read it as a human, but for AI. Code is context. So, that's why quality matters. if you just write code something, uh or later the AI is going to itself the code. sustainability of codebases has been needs to be simple and easy change. that that perspective hasn't changed agents. We allow ourselves to more code in the code that is there might not be simple and might be as easy to change, but we're well, it works, right? And then on top of that be quite brittle. and well, as humans we also allow this little exception where as long as it's modular, it doesn't if one of the modules is messy or as long as it's isolated, abstractions. that's also something that I found AI. If you keep your things helps a lot. Like if you have very boundaries between modules, if you well-defined interfaces that are allowed to change, for example. I would say that brings us to of guardrail which are constraints. So, a lot of they have architectural unit like unit tests, they execute quickly. They only look at, know, what dependencies exist different modules of your code they can analyze it very quickly and can say, okay, prevent um say the the um say what could you say the the UI from accessing the database You could say enforce that it has to go through the business layer or something like that. because they also tend to make these interconnection between modules human would never do. if you just let the I sign your and then draw your plot of your diagram, you will see the things that enrage you that you encode them into um architecture unit tests. Which I would count as a another of guardrail. there anything that you would say, this is then still kind of part of human responsibility that would not in automated guardrails? Um so, mean, if you look at software and going back to the way of doing it, always used to be, okay, what do we to build? How do we build it? How we keep it maintainable? Right? Um the code base clean and simple we can go fast for a long time. how do we do it? Well, with right? We define the up front and then we start into the modules. How do we each other? I think that still stay the same. the models are not there yet where can do that on their own. um my workflow now includes first exactly what I want to exactly, so that there's no doubt. then sketching out how this might as a software system. Could be different services to each other. It could be on a level, you know, different talking to each other. Um which do I need in the modules? So, specify pretty much entire except the implementation. once you have that, you can already that as rules. know? this I think that's extremely to also to combat um think on your show um already talked about um the uh dissonance that comes from not reviewing code you don't understand your code anymore and you're not able as a to reason about your code base That comes when you don't the architecture anymore and components talk to each other within software system. yeah, you need to do everything to that as much as possible. Yeah. but very hard for me to imagine where is going to go because agree with you. If I understand my system, I feel like that's the that's really going to remain for specifically. And I do believe the implementation we're already and I feel like with enough we can hone code reviewing where only the essence, potentially behavior, I see people reviewing That will then also But if I put myself in the seat an engineer, maybe someone that's who's in a bigger you might not already know system, it's quite difficult to be like, this piece of the puzzle in do I really know how to build or how much investigation do I need do? That's all work that would happen front now. And potentially before AI, would do that kind of as you go and would iterate and you would improve. whole way of working is now um very very very difficult to be in your approach now, which is why people find it what I would say some people might resist it because, know, doing all the hard work up You're not uh just discovering as just said as you go. You're doing the hard work up front. Um probably have to do a couple of on your on what your to get a better idea of good actually looks like. that's not uncommon, but you can do with wipe coding. um think that is uh that is going to be new normal for for for some time to before things change again. the interesting part is that, know, I always ask people, well, how you develop software if you didn't what you wanted to build? also not possible. So, you're the same work now. It's just that you're doing it up front, right? might feel more intense, more But that also means that this becoming its own discipline. uh when people think about, you what should junior engineers do that AI can generate all the code, I would say, well, is clearly something that can That's an acquirable skill. seen the best software engineers of fall into two categories. The where, like you mentioned, had to build something and I saw stare at their screen. This was before COVID where we I worked at office 5 days a week. And I saw them kind of pencil and paper, and he like stuff and drawing things out even doing any hands-on. I was like, that's a very skill. And then I saw other where they're like, it's very for me to imagine, and I have to typing. But then they're still and extremely effective in way they operate, but it's like inverse of what the first engineer do. And the cool thing is that you allow yourself to do that, like do the prototyping, to go into this before you put your not into stone, but you kind of say, "Okay, this is we want to build." is that it's all incredibly really enjoy that. because um you we really feel the that AI gives you when you iterate ideas. I oftentimes find myself talking to AI for an hour just to explore this and then maybe a tangent idea and that maybe I shouldn't have gone on, um teaches you so much about how you can about systems. it also elevates you as an engineer now you're not only thinking "Okay, how do I implement this?" you also think about what do we need? What does the customer need? So, you can see that think engineers get much more They start to think at that level much more now. because of that. And that's just going to continue versus they would think about, "Okay, how do we write this in code?" it been for you? Because uh a lot engineers I talk to when they work there's a lot of stuff going up here terms of thinking and execution power of a sudden. And at the end of the they're exhausted. Um well, the burnout because constantly um exposed to stimuli you're constantly context switching the AI takes 20 minutes to to you, that's real. That's real. talked to a developer last week and on Wednesday his brain out. He just just His brain is on standby because he's constantly all the time. I think that's 100% real. with anything, I think the way to that is A, discipline. Well, the first step is to You have to aware of what you're doing. you also learn how to interleave maybe on the same project that do things. So, the work on on uh the that guides the agent, its own project. Besides the pro- project that you're trying build. I keep iterating between the two. when I'm waiting for an agent to something, uh because I want to what it what it does or how it did I will just switch to something else. might start another session with a agent on the same code base start interrogating the agent about code base. so, I stay kind of in the same I don't switch between project as uh if I don't do that, what ends up is that I keep have to type in session, "Uh please tell me what did do in the last half hour?" So, I just has to remind me of what I did and um weird sometimes. 100% Yeah. I saw Claude Code does that now. If you're out of a for too long, it gives you like summary of what you've done. So, you [laughter] have to ask anymore. there might be some UX problem solving. The I think ownership, and we already cognitive debt, is going to be very crucial topic that distinguishes of engineers that really maybe care about this craft about their work. And also, I I spoke Addy Osmani last week and he this newsroom which which I heard of, which he he mentions surrender, where people are agent just takes the wheel, and if the problem, it's the agent's and if it works, it's also the but well, then it's a little bit but they really just let go of what are responsible for. And I feel that's quite risky in the way we evolving. I think conversations like and I are having are incredibly to give people perspective to also challenge what goes away and remains as part of your And funny [clears throat] thing is what employees are doing is they give people a hand grenade, is AI, and then say don't blow up hand grenade, but use it, right? there's a lot of risk with AI, but of that is going to be standardized. going to be policies on what you allowed to do and what not with AI. uh the example I gave with Amazon, They already made a policy between your code that is critical than other code and how should be reviewed. So we're just to see the same thing and just to be another um guess form of the part of the process software engineers, right? Where have to define stuff where if you want to yolo it, okay, let's not the billing system, please. I think that's going to be pretty soon. um yeah, and also um a lot of the work that we don't want to do as we can outsource to AI as well. the idea of not doing any code comes I mean it's kind of like a idea, right? Uh but you attempt to do that, there there a lot of realizations come with it, cheap wins like guardrails. Um They are deterministic, they cheaply and quickly. then conversation shifts towards and specifications and more the specifications up front you know than the code later. even when you have to review architecture later as a human, you still use AI for that, right? You a conversation with the AI. Maybe have a specialized agent um you particularly set up to review any violations of a specific type of that you're trying to in your project. So, you can um do an automatic scan over all of changes, code changes with AI. then use that as the point to start into it as a human. So, can still automate a lot and it's just about where should I look? Where where I have to look? otherwise, I don't see how we're going to scale the review you know? Um code generation is 10 times faster, times faster, the pressure's going be on all of the systems that come from that. part of that is the review with the in the loop. So, we have to try to that as much as we can. The I feel like the input we can scale faster, right? We can just on more ideas and validate in production with different The reviewing process is really challenge. And some of the things you mentioned, I do see those as to kind of solving this that is the code reviewing and not having a human in the at all. If that's the let's say the goal that we're working towards, though it might not be feasible now the models we have, I do see in there. I do see capturing much as you can behavior and in tests. I don't think should be any reason to not write test anymore because you can just the test according to the that you want. Right? If you a bug, definitely make a test out that. That was already good practice, there's no reason to not do that nowadays. that's the trend. and also people don't what people also forget is that generating a test, small piece of code, the chances of LLM not doing it right are much than when you tell the LLM me microservice. So, that's also another point um I think helps when you uh write because if even if you them automatically, which is I do, um the chances of failure are slim. I have seen and spoken to other I'm trying to get one on the that have fully adopted Spectra development as part of their They use one of the frameworks and they're happy with their approach. That's I want to have them on the podcast. they mentioned that they have not think, it's my assumption, got the like you and I are discussing their code review process. What have done their review process now very much around the specification and is what reviewed. That is what is and I do think they have some in place to make sure that in the specification is also in code in a certain way. me, there's only kind of the the part which is the behavior that can be there. I think that's an interesting and actually good that you that because guardrails can mean just a prompt, right? Um I think how guardrails, you know, to be defined if I'm not But they can be deterministic well. The specification driven approach, I really like but mostly because it gives a clarity of what is being built. you give that to an LLM and you what it does, you'll be that after 5 minutes already to deviate from your intentions. you didn't specify something enough or it there was some room interpretation anywhere. So, you can now on your specification trying get it um perfect. you switch the model and it doesn't anymore. So, does this mean from your what do you think of and development? Is it something works now, but it's going to go in the future or how do you see I think that is part of um discovery product process of what trying to build. I think it's I'm trying extreme to have that. because that can also be used for test later, like checking. Do Did we actually do this? How did we this? we do this in accordance to our principles? Those are questions you can then to an AI to investigate. So, the will stay there. Um people like to uh in depth with the specifications, they treat it as if it was code. not. right? It's just um a document of understanding, I would say, that know, of the behavior, part of what what being built. think a fine-grained behavioral of whatever you're is much more important. was this idea of uh TDD, where if have um all of your tests and your software deleted, but you still have your you can rebuild your software. was one of the ideas of TDD. I have seen it work for the very time when I had behavioral tests that would give the agent I had a specification as a prompt to the implementation. was the very first time in my life had seen this actually work uh in my my project. That's still quite I wonder if with existing bases, if the test coverage, in theory, lot of this is in theory, which is why it's quite the challenge, but I if indeed, if you would throw out code, if people have been doing TDD that code base for quite a while, if AI indeed can then generate the code how it is according to the that was captured. well, if you have some tokens to you can try that over the weekend. seems like an interesting I have noticed is that the bigger companies, previously, AI and agentic software feel like they were trailblazing and a of smaller organizations were up to good practices, best conventions, and blog posts what is out there and what's Right now, I feel like the field is quite equal because is very quickly evolving. You mentioned uh over a few months, and their capabilities might and what is effective and all of sudden what is now possible, gives us a very interesting field to experiment with. How do typically experiment and educate it's a constant trying to catch up behind of thing. but I think that's normal for who's trying to keep up with I like to use projects. Um, I have a of different projects that are on different scale of one project that is by coded, purely. Never looked at code. I've only prompted it to do I have one project that is a CLI that is that's the one that I for the approach with the behavioral behavioral tests as guide I test that type of approach. have another project that consists of microservices, which is much complex, which is mostly specs driven. I keep adding features to them using different methodologies that I set for this project and just observe does the AI do, what does it do etc. more often than not, I see the AI do weird. then make I make that immediately of my default guide rails. so I kind of have a repository where have a default project setups for languages and they're with a certain type of guide that I found useful in the project I do. So, the experimentation a lot of communicating with the really found it useful to ask the LLM explain itself. So, if if I I give it complex task, typically what I ask is tell me what your understanding of what we are trying to do. simple question. So, I'm trying to out what the model understood what said versus what I said. And you can how models interpret things that gives you an idea of you know, personality is too far reach, but sort of type, you know, what type does this model exhibit? what type of behavior does it Probably the better term to use, yeah. I do that a lot. Um try out the latest tools that they us. Like when sub agents came, I that out. I concluded that I have zero about what the agents are Like what are they communicating I have no introspection. then what I would do is I try to introspection to that and I built own of system where I just told an "Please spawn a sub agent, but do in a different terminal so I can see what you send to that agent." yeah, well. will see the weirdest things that models tell each other, right? You already see how the models start to like at the first uh step when hand off tasks, et cetera. trying to look under the hood as as possible, what information gets um monitoring what the agents when they talk to each other, I think are incredibly important things the orchestration itself. learn a lot uh the most from looking those types of um of what the models do and how talk to each other. So, I I think is how experience most of the time to refine understanding of what the models do also trying to apply, you know, what give us in terms of tools. someone's listening and they want to agentic software engineering to own way of work, way of working, piece of code that is already live production and likely the team has adopted some practices or not at and they want to kickstart What is step one that you recommend? an individual developer or for in a team? could be within a team. I think the most profound case. I would say the simplest thing is with guardrails, um checks, You should have, of course, a formatter, you should have a to write some Semgrep rules that some of the best practices that see in your codebase. can ask the AI, for example, are some anti-patterns that we use the codebase?" Write a simple test flags them. if you work in a team, have a team you know. if you get resistance, well, then try next next best thing. It's really to convert people who are not buying into the ideas of trying to the codebase by stream-lining it tests or with guide rails. um you can run all of these things your local machine. You don't have to everybody to use it, but you can it for all code that you write know, you compare that with a smart that checks whether you created file or somebody else. um where you enforce your guide rail key point is you should measure at least get an impression of how it with guide rails that you put in place without them. because once you see that actually help you do more work and less in the loop, uh you will not go I don't think. it's becomes really convenient to not to worry about that and to babysit model all the time. I can see that, right? This term I'm trying to get rid of in conversations that I have with and I'm trying to figure out what best way is. could be indeed kind of experimenting going into this cycle of continuous and it could be you behavior as you want as guide for the agent to then pick up and something with. And it can also be that you get from your team, If you and your agent create a request and then there's feedback your team, you can also then that in more guide rails. that's also another idea. So, what can do is you can just ask the AI, analyze my session logs on this go into your uh home folder .cloud will start looking at all of your and you can ask it, "Do see any patterns where I had to repeatedly you of a certain thing?" Mhm. So, can data mine your session logs to where the model goes wrong, where always have to correct it. Turn that a static check. feels like a product that I would to have. is actually not a bad idea. actually it's it's a skill. You just uh use a skill builder, tell it to you that skill. It's very easy. It like 15 minutes, and then you can it. Earlier we mentioned harnesses might have different in some organizations, some people get one harness, and that's it, We've gone all in on GitHub cuz it has all the models, you but it's only one harness. would you recommend to either those or those organizations? a really difficult one. If you choose your tools as a developer, I don't think any developer is really to be happy with that. think education would help in that know, um I mean, there studies out that compare harnesses. Um we have added evidence to suggest that on one particular uh tool um is going to keep us at the edge. there are lots of arguments to be understand that organization this this this this desire tendency to standardize things, but it's not you select a product and then you with it for 5 years. That's not how works. um that just needs understanding of AI actually means. I feel like that's then missing, Because the we are now beyond specifically, and the harness matter more than the models paper, I think it's easy to models because that's we've talking about that for a long, long right? It's been 2 3 years right gone continuous iterations of and now I feel like more so this maybe even end of last year, the about harnesses really arising. Well, there's another thing you can as a solo developer. Try to find out what things you particular harness is at. it's it is at um you know, writing requests, documentation. it's really good at debugging. So, to find those uh use cases where you still use it and you use it for that. Yeah, absolutely. For the people I'm trying to do this new because I want your advice on what you want people to run if have a week time and they can do experiment as kind of their budget time they have. What would you want to do an experiment with? that depends on where you are in organization, I would say. But, for mean, there are a couple of options it depends on what you want. you want to get better at agentic like working with AI? you want to get better at building guardrails? Do you want to get at understanding how the models that that's the first question, What what do you want? There's an many different options of what do. Um I would recommend you want to get started with looking at semantic grep. Let's to encode some of your human that you would give in a PR a rule. the the example that I gave earlier no default values in method that could be one example. one could be um let's never swallow any errors. was any error must always be like that. just start with experimenting with see how um your agent reacts in that environment. um setting up I think the guardrails that you can start to improve them iterate on them, I think that's very and you will see I would that you would see wins very though you might as well think but we had the static code checks But, now you're doing it in a way you encode your human preference as absolutely. for your particular project. thanks so much for coming on. thanks for having me. is really good. you. you're still with us, let me know in comment section what you thought of episode, and we'll see you in the one.