this cost me almost 200 million to refactor. And I'm like, "Oh, I to stop using Opus. This doesn't is Haider Lesa, a true AWS veteran trained over 8,000 architects, and shares his blueprint for software with agents. Today, leadership start questioning, can do I need an engineer plus a month just for them to do their that math does not add up. Even if forge an evidence, they forge that run the test, they try to copy and the results from the internet, they do. How do I make sure that doesn't happen? and how engineering teams work them. We're doing something we've done before this episode and by end of it, you'll want to rebuild own software engineering workflow. enjoy. size and specifically Dublin and the scene has grown quite yeah. yeah. it must be fun as well kind of the you've built up and the there. yeah. I think uh typically have a company where your years are typically uh there then Amazon was especially that the of a hyperrowth or the idea of all need to do is a college or or this book that you read or something you you'll figure it out. None of things worked for Amazon because growth was just like staggering. I remember um from like maybe a few hundred to like 2,000 and 4,000 people every year and it was like what's on? How where are we going to end this? And he was like yeah the was minimum 25% year-over-year I was like then the head counsel was like yeah double let's triple let's and I was like so nothing of this would work. incredible. In the end you stayed 11 years. What are some of your learnings or in which role they? have too many. Um [laughter] think one of the interesting things Amazon was even though the size specifically was in terms of size, terms of and processes and so forth, it felt like a startup in a way. So could move between roles and between and that's some part of the reason suppose I was there for so long. I joined AWS, I went to a meetup AWS, but I said I would never join a like Amazon, never these It's like I'm I'm allergic these things. I just want to get done, you know? we are. [laughter] I remember I was complaining about the presenter, but I I didn't knew no uh in in in the audience. And then was literally two guys working for like, "Hey, why don't you um apply?" was like, "Yeah, I'll never do this." no it's a bit different and so Ever since I applied and I joined so forth I went to maybe uh I think different roles if I'm not So from support to field uh fields like technical account solution architecture solution architecture then build uh the what we call in the world the serverless So I was uh the first outside US. So then even trying to hire like advocates and everything else had to learn how to do the role until managed to hire. So all the things it feel like Amazon from the but inside it was like let's move let's just build these things. in terms of learnings two roles the three different roles were that marked I think the way I was something called technical manager. You typically are when things go wrong. think like we're having an outage or having a big incident or you using AWS, you lift and shifted now your spend just went through the and you're trying to how do I this spend? So all the all the that people don't really want to don't come nice to you and like oh let me problem I have and it was just like need help now I need to solve now. So one was when I met companies that didn't want to work with Those were kind of gaming in the early days or startups were seeing unpreent growth. So you see things like in 2015 of these companies doing DevOps at scale or a API first So this was 2015. So this already me think okay everything should be now or DevOps or something this. And then the normal was like 70 terabytes Dynamo DB table for and that was 2015. And then after when I started seeing other a few hundred so I was like oh still in the first 10 GB or So like oh there's lots of [laughter] that I can share Exactly. So I went from like the where everyone kind of dislikes or complain about AWS and was there help and fix and and try to recover trust in some ways the way to the first time customers at AWS and they first time they about elastic compute and it was for them it was like wow oh my god is this and then the specialist was the serverless where you went let's build this idea of API teams teams based around APIs and the and the DevOps together and so to actually your teams could be a smaller because you don't have to about server operations or most of operations pieces. And that's when I the second biggest shift in cuz initially I thought it's about tech. You just need to think your dependencies how you your code. You have to take into account. But now has a return of investment off to this which is developers have a hard time explaining on promotion cycle that if I work this refactor if I improve of this this would have to the business. It's very for developers to do this with was easier. I was like well if I this I could cut 90% of our bills. then people like really so now you have a line to explain something a CFO will be able to understand. But what I thought it was mostly was like, yeah, you don't need use Java for everything. It doesn't quite well for serless back in the You need to use languages like Go Python or Node.js. was interesting was for a small it was all tech. But when you're things like how does this work 10,000 developers, how does this for 5,000, a thousand, or a few developers, most of it was a transformation. So I had to witness not the not so parts of organizations where you're what do I do now if it's 100 people where all they do is watching a web and restarting things serless you don't have to do any of this all of this is gone how do you move from this do you you retrain how do you do it then turns out that role for me to a for the longest period was like to four years was How do we help organization to look at their own look at their own teams and thinking about communities, core engineering, building differently, building smaller and this whole idea of road map or back in the days was already fading of this model because it was so I could go to companies and do engineer as a service if you and in 6 months you could say well we go got MVP we got in production got post-production we got some and now codifying for the rest this was unthinkable in an phase because it typically years most of the work is not is lo largely coordination and convincing people on how things be and how but even how things be is an expensive move you have have stakeholders that would believe your word that way. But when you say just give me three people, I'll you is fun because it's a correlation to the AI topic which we'll talk it the last one. So I'll pause a so I don't dominate [laughter] talking these companies. It was like at point it was like roughly 70 a year but I've seen a few 300 companies in a wheel more or less the inside out to help them out becomes consulting becomes writing code becomes everything in What I learned about services even though AWS would do with all infrastructure for them and not have think about anything, there was a gap on I'm used to developers as a religion. My programming is Java. My programming is Python and nothing else It turns into an identity And one of the hardest things for was but I'm used to Spring. I'm to jungle. I'm used to these And now I'm using and I feel like I'm stripped I use this, I will have a cold start seconds, which is not good for the ping I built then was something power tools or lambda power um which was the idea of how can let them use a similar developer but also embed all this distributed system best practices deponty how do you deal with poison cues how do you deal with vitroid instead of static vitri breakers you name it and that up I initially thought I'll do this certain customers because I knew what the patterns were SDLC and they organize this went from like um let me just this prototype put in open source and what happens. I had no experience in source. I contributed hash corp now and then but nothing at the of power tools. eventually power tools in less than years no less than four years actually went from a few hundred downloads to like 230 billion API calls a to US government, British and a bunch of other places. I'm like, "Oh, I I cannot make a like like I used to. I need to uh so that's where I learned the aspects for the things I've been over the years with serless and feud and dealing with pressure all time and organizational changes. Now had to do something fun which was in public. M have both sides of the coin where wants to contribute and excite a new tech you know like rust comes everyone wants to rebuild the whole like everyone else has right power tools wasn't so different want to contribute to build a from scratch but now you have learn how do you write in public how you create documentation as your your source because you don't have budgets whatsoever how do you do product management in in the when everyone is criticizing and how you write and how thinking. How do you then on people that you never met and different time zones or how do handle the situations where people I contributed this but you're not my poll request and the time I expect because I spend my time this. I'm like okay [laughter] have a conversation or sometimes have trolls on the internet that do a lot. I had stalking, I had a of things as well on the on the on downside of doing open source. So three roles for me were where I how do I deal with production and production spend and phops was 2015 this idea of phops is like we were doing it [laughter] but I don't know everything but it was to see it emerging as a a name you put name to things the other one was the customer and the serverless and how to a business from scratch with the brilliant people I can ever think that would work again all the way How do I build a principal engineer a service? Or how do I transform help them see this STLC And the worst which is how you tackle identity of developers who being grown attached to their to their frameworks but yet them a path forward. And then the how do you then work in public use these skills and hats from product engineering, customers and in between. So that's a long but that was like years. I love that. Yeah. [laughter] start off, I started my career in and when I hear you say kind that experience really resonates that side when hits the fan things are crucial also at a level scale. I wish a lot of people have experiences like that cuz it really you perspective on of yeah what happens when things go and it drives you or you have it anchored in your in your brain always keep with you the whole building in it public your open source project blowing up. how did that happen in the first Like you you went from let's just this, it solves a problem for at what I've seen within businesses something that is huge and people on and building in public is scary. was I think privilege is the word. I privileged to work on a team briefly called you might have heard of called AWS well architected. M I help build what they call AWS well lens which is a way for you bring your own best practices for a for something like that and I the first one called serless lens also blew up by [laughter] very Um so we had something like uh think it was close to 10,000 unique on different what we call more than applications per se 6 months and that gave me a window oh I can see not only the SDLC but can also without seeing the name aim the customer of course for security and legal I could see the where people were struggling were having issues with was the first one. had traces but there was in the traces related to the like so you're not really it's really helping you. So when the tools was launched was I need to this process easier because this one of those like I was telling I not showing I did have examples of if you don't have observability way this is how you do it this is you do structure login this is how do everything this was 2016 by the there was nothing that could show a moment where then in a few seconds I have observability I can have a of things without feeling like I having to give away testing. I have give away the way I do design and so forth. So when I power tools, it was at reinvent and it was supposed to be like a um a about the serverless lens the console of AWS which the launch delayed a little bit but I shared a things and then I said all of this best practices about security reliability and so this is something I'm working on So, I was intentionally using the I think it was roughly 3,000 on stage back then to show this something that will help address, but it was it was received with half and half like super positive the criticism came which it's Python like who uses Python and I determined to say let's make Python best programming language for for which is power tools became when I launched uh what we call metrics and um metrics and logger the structure and it was so easy for people to demos it blew up as soon as start sharing in newsletters into call as heroes as community builders people started writing articles it how much easier it was. Then just created a life on its own. Uh the next big wave were partners not like Zabia but there were a few from AWS that started using it consultancies the point that people created custom and consultancies implementing tools and it was like okay now I control. [laughter] Now it just Yeah. Something like that. Yeah. Before we go into kind of the software development life cycle evolving based on your career I'm amazed right and I even been in this field for 11 and you've done 11 years in eight roles, hundreds of companies at AWS, a company that I look up to. I don't know about of the listener listening right but at least I still look up to it comes to their engineering Uh, and some of the people I've to that have had their tenure would your advice be for a listener to this and also thinking I similar experiences. I want to make impact. I want my career to also that in 10 years time. I think the best advice I I saw came from my favorite newsletter is nothing related to tech but something everyone needs especially you are a staff plus engineer. It's a called West Cow. Uh I'll I'll you the link and can share later. was something like when you get to senior plus eventually you hit a of what else can I learn. We are tend to be conditioned to learn only hard skills and all the technical and be really good and be the smart person in the room which is BS in a way but often times when try to go from senior to staff or to principal the hard skills don't matter because you have to have you'll never get there to with but they matter less because of the time is trying to influence trying to work with people trying communicate to people and the advice came from that newsletter was exactly what I've been doing naming put a name to this which eventually going to hit the ceiling the best way to grow your career is to try to learn more on how to be effective in your own job but to learn adjacent roles. So I from developer marketing. I from public speaking. I've from how do I do business How do I write? How do I become tech writer? You don't have to do the role to move to the I was privileged. It was a great moment Amazon had and still has. you can join open source and start out on how do I improve the So there's a lot that you learn about cognitive load, how perceive things, how do you break complex topics into simple things. engineer that I know, especially the senior level going to staff, they struggle with the same topic. go from complex to simple, never to complex. So those type of you can learn and and you can your own destiny that way having to rely on opportunities your employer would probably give Sometimes you can after you and open source to some other but you can own that piece like that a lot. So, it's like there's always so things around you. It's never a engineer that runs a business. can learn a little bit about sales, to influence people. At the end of day, we're always selling something someone, an idea or a thought or to convince someone to the if you will. those things are useful for life and can be useful for your career. Any career, right? Yeah. did that and it was purely on interest instinct and curiosity. I was like, would love to kind of see what this is experiencing or going on over there. Like I have clue. There's a blind spot there. Let try and figure that out or let me more about this thing. And it's like I feel like people are idiots I just want to really where certain decisions come Gregor actually gave me this Gregor hope he was like when don't make sense to you like very smart people there are idiots in leadership teams right smart people they got there for a so when decisions don't make it's probably some piece of you're missing them that I love because that kind of my thinking in that when doesn't make sense there's I'm missing right and I need bigger picture to be effective at I'm trying to achieve not just my job but at this team or at this specifically I I worked at Greg uh Gregory Amazon as well. I was lucky to with so many people. [laughter] I used to train people to become as AWS and so forth. And I the advice I should give them people who are heavily frustrated by leadership which comes as a spiritual being as that has every knowledge but act on anything which is a lie. when you don't understand something something feels irrational to you. why are they making this decision? where's the all the trail? Cuz not going to find any is there's to be an incentive somewhere. Follow incentives and sometimes follow the So once you do this, then you start to make a bit more sense. Yeah. Gotcha. Nowadays, I feel we're moving really fast with large models, agents, agentic loop engineering. Nowadays, are three people in the industry some something they say people and then they try and figure okay, where does this apply or is It's like it's really times right now. And I see that effectively for the single right? I don't have any other I build, I can put my down, me and my swarm of agents and just are effective together. When it comes to enterprise and how this the software development life for me it's very interesting to how things are evolving because I like everyone is experimenting and something different and I you have an opinion especially with background and I want to dive into Now we're going to do something we've never done before which is show you kind of a visualization on of what it is going to talk So if you're listening, you might to check out what we have on screen now. I think everything is set up us to do this. Can you walk me kind of I think starting from how is product evolving with in the loop nowadays? Of course. I mean this is what I'm to show is my opinionated version what I know it's working. it doesn't mean is the sole truth. you said, right now we're got into different phase of engineering. not engineering but running businesses we we are now being able to hyperpersonalize anything but is part of the danger because then a can accidentally assume that engineer is just a developer and that's all you need that all you need is you no longer PRDs or something like it and then fine because an agent can do for you and when there's called a trust and decline which I can cover more on this as we go through uh the slides but me show you um the product first. is one of the loops that we we do in the team among at agent called the task force. And the goal here to try to the concept of a product document. the famous or infamous PRD. So it doesn't something like like as an that you you know have it and just point people to it and more how we get the essence of something like into the whole stage of product into the engineering pieces so doesn't become an artifact anymore is now a mental model for people agents will do the execution but you lead them wrong and astray it's a right so the whole point of this loop is that if you start from all the way to the slash new which I'll explain doesn't change the idea of the If you ever were in an open role or ever were in my favorite of all times called product then you got to have to to people. You got to have to talk customers. Sometimes as engineers, we complain that requirements are I have to be do these things And it's like but you can also to customers. You can also get out the way. And this discoveries is our to let's talk to people first to out what is it that's needed. We like a always does as well customer is a key. But you also don't to take the advice from only a customer. You need to have some and you need to start ranking and figure out what is this one that I could do that could multiple problems at once. So the discovery piece. We're trying figure things out, talk to people. the next one becomes a whiteboard like an engineering kind of a session where you're trying to out this is what the customers telling you. These are the the of segmentations of customers what kind of feature would match segments or this type of customers which feature could make more sense tackle 80% of them like 80 to 8020 the people that are getting started the power users edge customers so forth. M the whiteboarding is for us to start out what is it that a road map look like because now with agents whole idea of let's do this quarter plan or yearly plan is mostly but again not everywhere. So do you do this in a whiteboard first it fits in your brain and then we have to codify this into actual road map into something. Yeah. we also don't want to turn this into waterfall like because it's also very these days especially with development that's not a but how we approach specdriven. we take everything that's in the and we call a assistant it's /romap we go there. So discovery and are those still the same doing that because from my it will be product people or responsible for their product the beauty of product um if you have a product with you and with the team have a superpower it's not always the case especially you're in a startup or if you're in places. So in the team that we have the resilience task force which we refer as RTF to make things we don't have the product manager. actually getting someone now which super cool. but engineers are all staff plus So they're expected to have of that skills. Uh so I most of the act as one when I need it. So I guide some of those discussions customers and bring another friend me uh staff engineer as well to out what is it that they're and do use some of the normal about ranking UX journey and of the things as well. When you mentioned kind of looking responsibilities adjacent to your if you're a software engineer. This a perfect example of that, right? Even the idea of like a tech I think some of the industry back the days used to codify this into oh tech lead would know but a product would equally be able to do it. is why it's my favorite role you can merge both customerf aspects of engineering dealing customers thinking about product map what is the outcome I want not etc. Most of the time you don't want to do it because going to have to maintain. So if don't if you sell something without amazing even better. Even better. And but then you need to be the the voice of uh I say truth but the voice of sometimes of this this outcome is in the business but to be able implement this is going to be very So you have to have that background. So product end up doing both. So if you to get those skills this agencies becomes like I can do even faster. Yeah. Then we have the SL road where for the first time this is you have the plus agent next to a Yeah, pretty much the reason the for this is that think I was trying to find a word more kind [laughter] to describe I read on the internet sometimes is when we are using models for so using the words like please using words like could you think about it's like waste of tokens but that makes your brain should that this is how you communicate but it's not really the way so force you have no agents whatsoever and think about what the customer is, it forces you to use more of analytical brain and use more of a kind of skew set that you wouldn't. So I wanted to this so your human aspects the pieces that drives you for even solutions don't atrophy a way. So this road map is now still of big part which I explain now but having agents first I initially with this and then realizing my communication became more tur more direct and I was like why am I this I I'm not rude I'm not that of person and it just happens to of us no matter the background of you have so the critical thinking especially the early side understanding customer and also using your language as that stays with the human Yeah, much. Pretty much. Yeah, if looking as a staff or as a biggest identity crisis that engineers have, especially is like they move from let me code this to oh, English is now my programming language and it's hard people to accept. It can get impact. It's complicated. another day we can talk more about this. Now, for the slash road it's like a stupidly simple. The of a slash road mapap is a command would try to take whatever input have on a whiteboard or notes or to try to update or create a map like a markdown road map. really complicated and that have these are some of the phases ideas that I have or milestones if will and once you have this then you say let's go ahead and sync this to system we use GitLab, Jira, you it. in our case is GitLab and this epics, creates issues but one of major wins for having a SL road map that sometimes especially engineers we forget that we're going to have have some level of acceptance or what is the outcome that we road map enforces this because then I use this into the developing loop. I another loop just to verify have we achieved the outcome we wanted none of the code and the test And the slash means it's a skill it's something that's preconfigured helps you with that. this is a command. So we use a a called factory. It's a factory It's like cloud code. There's companies like this like the open code and so forth as well. the idea is that we have the of a command which is that's user invoked you have the skill which is a more a model invoked. I keep having mixed with skills because at Rajin we true believer of using multiple experimenting a bunch of things we not we don't use only like a claw instance opus or something like it use I think it was in my account it roughly 32 different models cool is a lot of different models so their experience and the quality a lot it's great for um token and budget which we'll talk it But when it comes to having his everywhere, what I notice is that you have many things that simply skip or they say they're it, but they're doing completely So a command forces to actually use it. And this works, I think, more in augmented way, right? Where the human still in the driver's seat, they say, right now we do this because we a command instead of a skill." And when you go more towards autonomous that's where the model makes the on okay based on the context we apply X Y and Z in skills. pretty much. I'm a big fan of of everything explained to and so forth is that are nondeterministic by nature. now we're adding more agent which is more nondeterministic. So I need level of determinism. So this is commands make sure that I know instructions will be followed to a degree. Yeah. What's next? The next one uh I briefly talked which is now that have a road map you typically going it's going to create this roadmap.mmd whatever folder structure and then have a sync of this road map you ask you but if it doesn't you a /ro woman--sync that will create all this epics all issues and update the road map so case you run it again you know we determinism you know I want you to creating more epics or something issue with this commands for product what I noticed create go ahead and create epics and and then the next time you run it actually going to create the ones similar very because I think the is right there and then it keeps tripping itself so the idea of having separate one or a separate subcomand to make sure that these are more and are these epics sub items the of the problem we're trying to which is going to result in a or feature set is the product or the and even the product defining what that looks like is the agent helping with how to down this bigger piece of problem. both. That's why I put the human agent. when you mentioned augmenting I is my almost new favorite word in way. Um as humans there's so many things we can think about it. Um one of things we do a lot at a especially this project is doing adversarial So whenever you have a road or have a plan, a spec or something, always run a multiple angles of uh review if you will to see you miss anything, if there's you're maybe overengineering if you're trying to boil the ocean to degree. So we have that element, but not so enforced or so hard as a requirement. it has a it has a instruction to after the road map has been finished a pass like a mini loop to see if of those are similar and they can merged or if some of those don't have outcome or clear acceptance and interview using socratic until we actually get to the of this is the thread this is how think this is your rationale and are invariance and now we know the product needs even in doing all this you're never to Yeah, 100%. This is some of the that we do to make it easier make also people. I think I would to have this. I'm right now for product and to have where and I do do this with my but it's not really like as such, right? kind of free flowy right now. And feels like you have more of a process make sure that the outcomes and also people determining the outcomes are at that. I think again privilege. think this came from this cooling of to a degree. Uh because Amazon very heavy on writing. So you be able to get an idea out you had something on paper. So you to convince people through a not through a presentation. In ways, this was amazing because it whoever spoke the loudest would win, but whoever had a the most of thought, if you will. But it also hard because not everyone would able to read or write to to a degree. spent like four maybe six years on just on writing which was a lot of time. Not everyone has time uh and for this when I try how do I this to a a gentic word and how do bring this without turning into Amazon some of the toxic pieces that happens in writing. So the trick even if you don't have of a process is to always tell the use the socratic method to get to bottom or find holes in my thinking clarity and so forth and that alone it to be more structured. do you mean with the socratic or how can you explain that for listener? Yeah. So the Socratic is come from philosophy where trying to get to an understanding a topic truly simply by asking and you one question leads you another question another question and trying to see if there are is in their thoughts as trying to ask a question. you it's not that you run out questions but you run out of threads you find these discrepancies and they say things that actually it of goes against what you said in a statement and so forth. So the method is a way for you to like an investigation mode but a curiosity lens. You're trying understand something to the fullest without make it seem like you are someone and they committed crime and they have to tell you now. So when you have the kind of peer this is the method they use only They're not people that say have a question and then also give opinion. And you can do this with agent as well, I'm assuming. pretty much. I at Amazon I had a which was super cool was a almost as a service. And I had called discovery [laughter] is where some of the name come And I had to figure it out within week a company would tell me that um they were unable to ship fast which is like vague like there's many things never a technical reason that they are engineers are not doing something as they thought was the quality is not there maybe need to think about hiring so they wanted a second and in that one week I had to people I had to talk to people almost like a consultant in a way one of techniques was basically we're going to go for 90 minutes I'm going to ask you a few questions 70 minutes or so, but here's the of the here's the rule of the game you you tell me if I'm being I would not show my opinion. will bring no bias whatsoever. Even it's almost impossible human in but my role here is to try to your point of view and try to to the bottom of how you think. your mental model? what is your of the word and then I use method to simply keep asking and then playing back and try show them in the last 20 minutes of meeting. This is what I understood. I take it wrong? Did I take it else? And then I would repeat I get a view of okay this is where patterns what agents do pretty and these are the things that it true from a position of power or position of management or you name it. when you start digging it, there's a of misconceptions, misinformation, lack of transparency, which open kind of solves it. It seems like a very interesting that I can also just put into and experiment with, right? I have to say I'm going to now use method, [laughter] I can just keep asking questions and it's not in an annoying way people kind of drill down their and we get clarity on what they want to do in that way. And that's basically what I'm with agents. I'm actually forcing to do this with me. And sometimes becomes annoying because they're "You're doing this to me. Don't do what you're doing." but I think what it's what's amazing this is that we the more you have, the easier it for you to jump into the quicker it becomes. Oh, seen this before. And you think the re revolves around this the idea of socratic methods or say let's do an investigation for minutes just questions like if I'm too hard or too aggressive let me and then I'll some of the intensity if you will setting the expectations up front having nothing but paper notes and questions it helps a lot. you also do this with paper notes Yeah, I of the roles I had. Sorry, there's too much. [laughter] that's okay. Yeah. of the one of the when I moved from my god, you're here. Let's solve Production is down. No, Or sometimes it was also like a a [laughter] you. It's you. Um when I moved to the other completely contrasting version of which was something called solution which we nowadays we call like deploy engineer in a way I had go to those customers and it was the time ever they saw me and they like oh my god it's amazing so but there was so much that they to share or worse sometimes we it was this was commercial world I needed to I always had a account with me which I learned heaps on in sales and I and I saw Oh, is not this thing that you just to sell something like you're relationships like oh okay and the secrets was the paper what I through the role was I was have a premeating just before very important meeting let's call stake meeting so I would use my to prep two or three questions of time prep a part where I would say these are the main takeaways main actions we're going to do it and go around it and what I've noticed the few years of doing only pay I do paper by the way only do paper nowadays yeah it's I started to look when I go to meetings I see with laptop I'm like oh I know not going to pay their fullest to this there's always a wall between and this thing even though it people don't really intend to to this way but it comes this way it's with paper you're basically there open so in a more in I wouldn't empathetic way but It gives you an because you can see body You can see typically what 70% of the communications body language not as non-verbal but not body per se. using paper gives me two advantages I will never get on laptop. On I would always type faster than thoughts are able to process and information which is a On paper is the opposite. always writing slower because I'm I'm already digesting that On laptop I usually take and then I have to spend another thinking about what is it that I what is it that I understood and from paper I do this simultaneously something called dual theory can about these things but it gives me the laptop would never give me is I can ask you a question like a question or mirroring something did to me and as you answer the I might already have two or other questions lined up or I can down a question should not you. So your flow keeps and maybe you already answered question I was going to ask. So I cross and that conversation becomes natural and it feels like on the other side you've been heard you a connection and with paper they do this very quickly. So I can guide conversation whichever place we want to be feeling like I'm coercing you or something like in a bad way. I realized this blockade that a can form and sometimes when share something I'm like I I to try this out and I have this of I want to try this out but I don't really like writing in the paper note like what I try and do is my approach genuinely and it depends on the context cuz I do need to take notes on the I try and remember as much as I can this probably this setting of and kind of being in the seat hosting and asking questions and really helps with me memorizing, and like picking a thread after it's been dropped later. but that's my approach. And then as as that meeting ends, if it was an one, I go and I take my notes cuz I also want to kind of be to revisit them. And right now, I typing less and less. So, as soon as done, I go click to text, let's go, random here and there. And as I'm that I feel like might be to what you mentioned when I also gain clarity because I type quite quickly and it can be rough notes just here and there here and there but when I'm speaking trying to articulate well. So then of a sudden I need to have my in order which means I need to down the way I speak and actually clarity in my thinking. that's precisely why we use paper because a way is a forcing if you to slow down. We always this problem before agents and now have agents even more. We have more than we can know what to do it. being able to reason about something then a step ahead. This is what paper give you. So a simple trick next you just take a normal page of count five lines from uh from the of the page, just draw a line and there all you're to do is write in your questions. don't write an entire question cuz impossible. They're not going to be enough. Otherwise they're going to we're speaking it makes it feel worse. So what you would do is you will write keyword or something that reminds you the question you want to ask and you ask and then it goes and then already have a second question as are speaking that makes it more not the raw paper notes is not for to type everything as is. Yeah. just for the thought of you thinking is the question I want to ask more less the frame. this is the next that we should be crossing after meeting ends or something. It's more enough. You don't need to take lots what is it that they said cuz the goal is for you to be there, be have a good positive image in a then I basically achieve something agree to something. only reason we have meetings which of the developers hate is that we think differently. We always have points of view. So a meeting a successful meeting always have I love which is why are we to begin with what is the criteria so when you go to a everyone knows this is why we're if we don't cross this then this especially if it's recurring be canceled it hasn't served his purpose but it has then fantastic now you have notes what the next action should and perfect so this idea of taking is to give you the advantage of can now read the table. There's techniques you can also use in which is super cool. Uh but you use the reading of the table and you to slow down. So now you can how people say certain If you type that person says things, but how did they feel? they pissed? Were they actually positive? Were they like, "Yeah, how we do." It says a lot more what you're going to capture as a if you were to um almost like in a station have a scriber just it. We're not scribbers, We're supposed to have that and know where to go next. that explains a lot to me cuz I thinking of writing out my full on paper and being like, I'm too slow of a writer. I need to get faster at writing if I even want to this. But keywords is what I do when do do it on a laptop as well. So then would make sense to try this. I am to try this. I think it's gonna be do. After your podcast, I'll show some of my favorite notes. I was even thinking, should I then do in a podcast setting? Should I just like, there you go. actually did when I used to do and such, I used to do it as Yeah, it's very quick. Uh it's a reporter like it's you. those are the things that you like, man, I never thought about this way. just like, have you ever seen a bringing a laptop for an They will never do this. They always have something like quick notes or something. Yeah, why. Yeah, we talked about breaking from discovery a problem that you and breaking them down into epics issues some form that is more What comes after that? now that we have the road map, one of main things that happen is this of judgment of have I actually everything cuz humans want to I wouldn't not every human has a of perfectionist. I do is a problem. uh and I built to prevent me from be in a way otherwise I get done. um you got a road map but normal sense it would be especially the engineer like what if I start this halfway through I oh I missed something or I didn't the clarity of thought that I I had because sometimes when you actual code you find more things if you spoke to customers hundreds hours it's normal then we have called slash new work which is another command so what that does to bridge that gap when you're something or especially the problem now with agents is like, just just one more thing. I can do it. It's so cheap now. you want me to do it? It even asks It's like, "No, don't don't feed my my toxic personality in that in that sense." more thing. No, don't do this. It's not a Jobs type stuff of stuff. And sometimes you want to capture that so you you do it later or it's literally a hole into the but it's not a hole that you could prevented from the to begin with. something you only realize when you in the process of implementing or something. So slash newwork takes your context and then you can say you what I just found this but sounds we need an issue for this and then creates a new GitLab issue or J and he associates with an epic work always remains traceable. you can do this throughout or you know it's a new let me just do this because we have it. So you can use both ways. I am a person that for some I'm a little bit more for some things and especially when comes to the way we software engineer feel like we need a certain level of because as you go and as you you learn new things and sometimes of the way is actually perfect and keep it that 100% because the last will never be prioritized. That's my approach so far to a where sometimes I'm even like too on that way of thinking and that and white. so I also need people to that and be like well is still actually very important x y and z reason. So yeah, this I think be quite interesting. this is the beauty of u this is um I don't I don't like when say, "Oh, I'm using agents and now 20 100 times productive like in single setting or in a team setting we don't work alone. Uh even if say you work alone and you're on a single open source that you everything on your own, eventually are going to consume and ask you So you're still going to have level of collaboration. So for me building teams back in the days it always trying to pull uh pull people their strength and see what adds up opposed to oh this people could only this. What is it that actually add to team? I if I were to build a team I definitely want someone like you start going through hang on a second trying to boil the ocean. Let's be little bit more pragmatic in here to the task and get the job done. But I also want to have someone who be like have we really thought every single corner case? Have we a formal verification which is one the hardest things to do in uh to cover the last 10% or 5% if you will cuz sometimes there critical mission critical where these things are not nice to have. These are table stakes. Yeah. Yeah. I like that a lot. really dependent on the use case mindset you need and having a equipped kind of within a allows you to be very versatile on problems you solve. And I and I had this conversation week with a with a very senior trying to understand a reorg in that happened without going the internals because there's no in sharing. But engineers would see a reorg as oh another Oh my god. like we're going to it again. We don't have focus. sometimes this organization is a organism as well like software so forth that the moment you change you might you you might not the full picture like the pieces discussing. They don't understand don't understand what they're so forth but it's only preparing organization before it makes another significant pieces like we're software. You're not going to say agent go ahead and refactor to rust because I love rust. might work. It might run out of It might have it might be Yeah. But you're trying to do make this more deterministic is trying to prep the code base so agents understand these are this the that work. These are the things should not do. These are the things should actually be caught by a link not by adversarial reviewer. you're spending too much time nondeterminism. And then once you this and now you make one change, it work? And then you make the one. Yeah. engineers then actually pick up an something that needs to be done, does that look like? very similar to let's call it the way. You pick up an issue then you say agent go do the task the agent will because the issue has a template you already know that structured. An issue would already a template and already have to say are the outcomes. These are the what the acceptance criteria what the problem is. uh way solution if there's one and will simply use the agent to drive and they would have a of uh how do I how do I get to work in implementation is this a use case is this a does it have or something like this maybe is a good hooking point to go to next slide to show you what a look uh cycle looks like do that more complicated than it looks I to make it as simple as possible but use a project called openspec which uh one of my favorites when it comes specdriven development. The idea of spec like anything related to development is you are having discussion a brainstorming phase first trying to figure out what the could look like. Do we need a Do we need a persistence Do we need testing? How do we this thing? Do we use ports and Do we use hexagonal How do we make this There's so many questions you're using and this openspec uses socratic method to try to asking you until they get to the of what your design looks like. never going to be 100% but it gets to a good enough do I test this? How do I structure code base or this feature? So the I read the files know what the role is and I can see level of architecture. So the is brainstorming of the task. sometimes that's the pragmatism that in. You don't need all this machinery just to do uh the color of something or you just add a drop down. It makes sense to have an entire open spec uh into it. So then you can simply your way out then we have verification layers to say we actually achieved the outcome as wanted as described in the issue as in the road map. So you remove pressure off the the individual the and also the agent to get perfect. Openspec I I've experimented and if you're listening we have a image on the screen that shows the loop I would say. it starts with exploring. That would be an agent and a It says also sot which is model. you would do this with the higher models in exploring what issue to be built. Exactly. of the differences uh at a which I by the way is that we're not the of company that will just use for the sake of using an hype. mostly trying to think about what it that would solve the merchants's How do we make the merchant uh this technologies or something for get better margin loyalty you name it all the kinds of problems we to get and when it comes to AI we technically use sot only the oppos only like GPT 5.5 or something like but that eventually comes with a cost you're not similar to the the jargon developers use the best tool for job you don't want to use this all time so in our process we usually three different tiers of models. We a let's call the best model sa help me understand help me explore do anything don't create any files you're prohibited to create you have to ask for permission you create anything there's hooks something we can prevent it and is where I find those very large super efficient especially if you something like fable which is at planning things so once you a plan out and you go to let's say then you can use more of mid tier depending on what you planned then can use smaller models, open weights, super effective do rounds and rounds and rounds of So your your finance appreciates and then can also make more efficient use of which is something that we're still getting good grips of it in age of the AI now. Right now we're into like yes use everything maxing which is not my the thing I a fan of [laughter] eventually that that cost will come then when leadership start hang on a second do I need engineer plus 5,000 a month 3,000 a just for them to do their work that math doesn't doesn't add up a one engineer few engineers sure I companies like it's a pocket money in an enterprise but when looking at the scale of a for like 1.4 4,000 engineers that have that math starts to show very and ask questions. But it's not we would be like we would never do but we have to be more sensible. we're still figuring out. has the final answer to all this they would have sold it for a years. We would have we would have been using it already. Yeah. Exactly. In this idea then do you envision this is to be a a guidance a guideline on how we work as software within software development cycle specifically in your in your org or are you going enforce this to a certain degree 1400 people having the ownership on them on this is how we work and them also having the ability to not that and to only use state-of-the-art kind of I'm wondering what your pattern is there. Yeah, came from cloud. [laughter] So the not cloud but audience would it. In cloud computing the shock that most organizations had I knew exactly what I would pay in server even with like thousands of then you would depreciate over x of years, right? X number of math calculation. You got it. Exactly. Which it sounds simple Yeah. It's capex versus opex type thing. And then cloud is like what do mean? I don't know what my bill is going to be next month. This sound correct. you go. Let's go. [laughter] So when you see the and and what you get from electricity and self-service and forth, you're like, "Oh, I get it." I also don't want to make this for because it may not make sense. it comes to a point where you have to human judgment otherwise why did hire the person to begin with? But you also have to have some level of rails on top of advices uh software to kind of help you it comes to AI especially at a we a platform engineering organization we have an amazing team just focus this right now. So one of the main from them is to figure out how the SDLC the software development cycle looks like in a gentic area. is it that we have to create as roads? Something that we know. But never going to be a single paved It's going to be paved roads on our profile, depending on application. Is this a web hook? Is in the critical flow? You're taking You're not going to reduce tokens something that's going to be a It's like a huge thing. Uh but how do what tools do we use? Uh one the main issues with AI now right now like oh I can use open code. I use cloud code. Sometimes I something else. kilo kilo from It's all over the place. Like was the same. It was no different. in this case, you're trying to what doing at Aggin specifically is to find those the normal uh the and um the idea of where you find who are the that are exploring things that we to keep a close eye to learn what's what's hype, what doesn't. part of my team's doing as well. now that we got this, how do we with two, three more teams of these experiences? Do we use spec? Do we use something else? opensp spec works for part of a of agent does not work at all we have a gigantic monor repo is not a bad thing. They have all context there, but the agents don't like at times it's too much and openspec quite have the idea of working a monor repo. It thinks that going to be in a top level But when you're having hundreds thousands of developers touching things, get conflict happens and else happens. So how do we it work now for a m a population of and then how do we How do we step onto this monor repo? So it works for the the core business of a for So we have this team thinking the things from a limits point of view. of the things that cloud does really and is shaved shaped the industry you let a service like AWS Lambda simply say you know what you can do from now at any point in time send a request and we we'll come up infrastructure for you. When you do a few million customers you're to have to do a lot of capacity and it could also be the wrong Why do you need even need 100,000 from the first application have? It doesn't make sense. So the help you to put that soft guard to figure out, oh, okay, you hit limit. We can increase it. There's problem. This is fake money anyway. let me learn how are you actually it. Are you using the SOT model So it becomes more educational and comes from a different curiosity of view as opposed to my way is way. This is our gate. This is like way we should be doing it. So this becomes more of an IT service as to platform engineering. So it's really you are giving a of autonomy and ownership to but you have a conversation kind of built in because there's a budget when it comes to what you can use right if you want to Intelligj there's a license cost. So there's a budget and with state-of-the-art we now have pay you go. So there's probably a cap on somewhere. And when you hit the there, you have your conversation to talk about, okay, are you using state-of-the-art models or we do this smarter in a way? So where you hit education much. We also do we as in as a but it's all platform all their credit nothing to with [laughter] they are thinking they have their own website with patterns. This is people are actually doing with AI. is are some of the if you use spec this is what makes These are some of the people the company that you should talk to. is how this is a guide for when to the very large model. This is a guy to use mid-tier models, smaller openweight models, that sort of So it's written there. in this day and age very few people then it becomes this convers this not so self-fulfilling. becomes a loop in itself where now hit a limit. Let me get close to trying to work it out. Maybe you even know that that guidance was to begin with like solution like forward deployed that we call these days or the guidance is not enough it's implicit and how do we make this explicit maybe we need more tools we can do something which I'm now called autoizer before do a task before the agent goes and implements like let me do this the hero um maybe think it through he need a spec or does he f just do hoc prompting M it's never deterministic 100% but it's something that you can add not make it look like you can only do this these are your never stopped anyone from creating will still go absolutely yeah very stubborn folk the [laughter] I like that as well I'm thinking in my context how do we make practices scale in the end and I the same thought as you someone kind of a budget cap conversation can we Can we educate? Did you about X Y and Z? For me, in theory works, but when we're talking about people, how do you scale these of conversations? Have you thought that as well? I mean, again, privilege AWS, I managed to I think back in days I trained like I don't know plus architects back in the days. because I was lucky enough to be one the first uh then a time for patterns and a read before anything else or try to use a summarize it for you if you don't to read it. Um there are tools that make your life easier because you to codify these things as much as like I did with power tools. If codify it to a point where this stop of the workflow, people won't even surprised by the time they hit a or something for instance and then have the normal like internal internal community building if will and building the ideas of everywhere. Uh not only at a are trying to do this as well but was very notorious for doing Uh one of the things I loved about was when you go to an interview instance you would have the concept a bar raiser. So we have someone been very very experienced in lots of people call of people and they will not be your team and let alone in your most of the time they'll be outside but you will know you could trust that if they earned accreditation if you will you know going to have a high bar. So idea of champions like training and tears does pretty is the same pattern. It's nothing. we're dealing is nothing new. Uh it the speed of how you can hit the and hit the wall. chang it. But the way you approach the way you look at things is the I like that. It's not just we do this. We do this and this and and this to make sure we have bases covered where we're in educating people making they are feeling enabled and to work on whatever outcome are responsible for cuz that's enablement much if you look at the software you if you will which I really love do it when I was doing power tools the team and with the community I did it alone I my biggest was how much is is much is this just an opinion because think we're right cuz it can happen. happens everywhere. And how much do simply leave them to make a decision their own and just give them the This is like always been the thing. So when you look at and think if Java gives you all standard libraries and a bunch of like Python and Go and so forth, do people keep using frameworks? of the time is like you don't want make decisions. You want to make as few decisions as possible. So once figure that out in your own context, your own problem space, what is it you don't want to make a decision? is it that people get you decision Like this is nothing to do with This is not going to change the outcome. Then you codify and you automate this and remove the decision. So agents basically is same. The idea of the road map that just discussed, the idea of having that would act like a thinking in a in a very aggressive way, a socratic way, uh all the way to a which we talk it we'll talk about merge checks, which myself initially hated, but now improving. uh is there to save you from from things but it's also there to not you to make that decision because only so many decisions we can in a single day before we already tired before all the walls of text are reading from agents are producing so these things get to you yeah what's next in this workflow next piece we have is the the actual once you figured something out you what you need to do then the plan creates the actual So this would be the There's a spec to this. a design document and there's a We don't use the vanilla open I learned that we can the most the power of OpenSpec is that you codify the workflow you want, which amazing because you're always going have a spec that has to happen. else you can customize. You add many gates, many artifacts, a PD you wanted to. And that is the phase we now introduce things like verification which is a way for to specify how your system should What are the invariance? What the states that should never happen begin with? Think an outbox pattern you add something to the database, transaction, and then you also add a that you can use as a queue. For you put an event or something. that outbox typically would always something like it has been persisted is in the process of being persisted it failed should be retried. there's nothing if something happens of this it's wrong. So you can these things using something we something called FSBY which I really but there's many others TLA plus So when you do this is more for agents to know what needs to done at implementation level because is like for us humans is never this plan creates all these things at It creates the spec enumerates all acceptance criteria because it came the road map. He enumerates what the what are the outcomes that we want to do the entire goals non goals what is the strategy what are we using in testing for do we need do we need testing do we need property testing unit test is a given but else do we need and are we creating for the sake of test or do we need to all the way to is this UI changes if it does cover UI what are the components we're to use are we going to run testing for accessibility and of these things. So the design is comprehensive and it's something we So the agents just look at and got it. And then the task is a atomic version of this. So this first and we're going to do this first the API and it also covers like if this is a breaking change is our migration strategy as well. what do you do first? What can you in parallel? What can you do Would your advice be to with openspec and then indeed look what you think is important within software development life cycle and that as much as possible or are frameworks out there or sources where people can get to kind of get a head start. I would always recommend is start and then you you bring your own The mistake is to choose TLC which is really good. It's of the most advanced right now or Amazon key or something that's baked in and use that as the way because everything works inspection AI So the beauty is start so you understand the cycle of specdriven development. So you're to have to have a spec, you're to have to have a design and going to have to have tasks. the that's the essence of it. But quality of what your design looks the quality of the additional that you can do, this has to come you. So you can start with Opensp spec I think is the You just install Openspec and just open spec explore and you you with everything. Don't have to anything else. don't stop there. If you stop there, a mistake because then it means you probably don't have a process you probably haven't taught too much software correctness. So the will basically be as good as the that you're using it and that's no How fast did you start with openspec to what you have now? much time was in between kind of [snorts] the thoughts that have the opinions of the and the people driving it. this the initial version of openspec a custom workflow took me like a to get to a point okay this works in team that took a good three to four because I was like anybody else and I'll just use it and then moment I start using every iteration like oh there was like 50 million I was like I did one which was a of how I was doing front end doing something I really love now local first architecture which is my god I wish I had known this and this cost me like almost 200 tokens to refactor and I'm like oh I need to stop using doesn't work. It's And the moment I tried to use open weight models, think Kimmy, uh GLM or something. This was like months ago. implementation was like so worse uh start lying to me think even lus as well. And that's why it took a more time. I can codify these But the moment I try to save on tokens and use different models, like using different frameworks, like using different programming So I have to be very careful learn do I now build a verification loop is now called loop engineering. so then I can this into more of a commodity which is ideally where we should heading. this took a lot longer. This is where spend most of my time. How do I bring SOTA models right here, the models and then bring a tier and then I bring a very cheap to do reviews. you capable still? That took a lot back and forth. The piece I'm working now, which is in part of the the is I'm building a It's not going be perfect. It's never going to be but I'm trying to be [laughter] I'm honest. I'm trying to build that works for let's say all models where I can trust that if they forge an evidence, they that they run the test, they try copy and paste a results from the which they do. How do I make that this doesn't happen so I don't in code that I didn't have the time review. do I make sure that oh it was just more thing? we always do this and do I make sure that the biggest I had was when you go through loop you're using open spec and you driven that should gets you like 19 quality wise software correctness but there's always going to be you want to change and that's this slippery slope happens because now going to ad hoc prompting and you have to remember to run reviews run certain things which now you're apart you're falling prey to one I learned at Amazon called intentions relying on people to remember, we need to run these things. You can CI gates, but it also goes so far, So, this is the part that I'm most of my time now. I think going to cost me, not cost me, it's to be a one month more investment I get something that works outside my team as well. it's like people going off the road that you've defined and trying to have some principles in to make sure they actually go back track. like we discussed. Yes. You want to say this is the only road it's nobody knows. will never be only one road. truth is always fragmented, right? are multiple versions of the you know, except certain facts, We don't [laughter] don't want to turn this political by Um but with agents having time there's an outage atropic, time there's a new model, every something happens, I notice there's deep in quality. But it's difficult to It's very difficult to do I don't I barely trust his nowadays as well and I have have something that safeguards me this deviations this quality and so forth because we're with nondeterministic pieces, You briefly mentioned LFA local architecture and also specifically I wish I had known this. Could explain that for the listener? man, this needs another podcast. local first is imagine let me do the way around. we build architectures where have a server somewhere cloud on you name it and you have a that will have to um basically with that transaction the API you name it. You're typically to have the API server somewhere on the client and on the client typically going to have some of caching if you will depending what you're dealing with. nowadays there are newer that the browser became so more powerful in what it can do. give you the example what I'm on right now and why I had to do This is an engineering challenge. have offices in many parts of the at a and we have the application building now helps you. It's like a of the well architected uh tool better in my opinion like an engineer would this is built in Amsterdam and on premises even if we were cloud would be the same issue now you want in Singapore and Chicago and San to also do reviews and try to live collaboration of a review the alone it's not going to make things fun and it's going to be and sometimes you're also going to the issue If if I need to upload a don't know 100 megabytes attachment also going to have because come into play. How do you what typically would do trying to solve issue is easy. I add a CDN code serves you static assets and serves certain things and it gets you a a handshake a TCP handshake but it's really solving the problem. It's basically a band-aid eventually to have more problems. So a genius think I can just use a distributed Let's use cockroach. Let's use Postgres everywhere and just adding everywhere. But now you're dealing with a synchronization and now you got a distributed Good luck with this. It's not as as it looks. So the local first was how do I give people in parts of the world the same to be as nappy as possible to Git where I do most of the locally first. So think transactional database locally then [clears throat] I sync the that I actually need and to make work. So now you're inverting the and you're creating a data architecture where the is a source of truth now which is unheard of. then you're syncing to the server you're going to have to have sort of aggregation. local first architecture is the that everything that you're to do is going to do local first to happen local first. But it prevent you from saying well part of the page should actually be from server like analytics makes sense to do things in locally you're going to blow up their right so there's new that's called u opfs orange private uh file system if I'm not if the server a http server web respond with two http headers cop and cop I can very long to what them but local first will enables the browser to unlock a called um VFS virtual file which I can now persist a file in machine. is amazing. Yeah. it's sandbox there's a bunch of is to be a which is good thing it's a thing. what he allows you to do is this of local first. Now when I load my called where it can be the first page the shell which you something a distraction to download a SQLite web assembly will install on your machine create new database run all the tables and so forth in a few minutes milliseconds and now every happens locally. now your server becomes more of a engine. Yeah. [clears throat] of the whole very APIs and so forth. This makes the experience feels like this is This feels like really snappy it very looks any latency because happening locally. brings different challenges. Release now become open source in a way like you you not break the client, right? You have think about self-healing from the You have to think about more carefully. You but you so many other benefits as well. server, your API becomes much You have what? You have a you have a pull pull, you a push and you have a workspace for only to sync the data for particular user based on based on authorization. I will have to look into this. This fascinating. is. I'm like I'm really loving it. I so much that I I pointed an agent uh the the project I'm working on now and I said look I want another forest architecture with the first in mind. So there's no no server whatsoever. happens locally a tool to help me prepare for midyear annual performance reviews. So I my own like uh record of local first app. happen locally to me there. If I want to export, I a dump and it's fine. that's why another podcast. There's lot to dive into. know I'm just I'm just trying to this. If you want if you're and you want an LFA local architecture followup specifically Hitler, let me know in the comment [laughter] Yeah, let's go back the development life cycle dev loop we have here. So we we talked about the plan on those ar those artifacts like design the spec and the tasks and you should not for the vanilla approach of opensp spec or any framework for matter but the go the secret is to your workflows your teams and your company right and then got to the apply which is the implementation one of tricks here for any spec driven is that your context is now filled with a lot of information, because you already externalize that into artifacts design so forth, don't need that baggage anymore. you're going to spend more every round, every turn it takes. the apply is simply a moment where say, me clear the context." Yeah. Switch model to something more mid tier or model if you will let it execute. Now, this can go for the way from 10 minutes all the way maybe two hours depending on how this thing is. uh especially how loops you have and so there's really secret more of a now completely autonomous not in the loop the agents is everything yeah you can drive sub agents you can do you can do anything you but openspec doesn't do anything it's just basically saying agent are artifacts go basically what happens I think the simplest part think it's fascinating that this of loop engineering and when say I don't code anymore or it's to say, right? But if we look at so kind of this workflow of discovery in items and then the the the customization, the already up front before that starts running is a lot of stuff is pre-prepared. I think it's the biggest lie to even when um the marketing and the came out and saying we don't need anymore. This problem is all It was the same when I was doing I was on the other side of the onto the provider and they said, you don't need many CIS admins many DevOps folks anymore you don't need them to look at server operations anymore." But it mean that their time is not no valued because it just moves up the chain. was never really the bottleneck the most part, but there was still difficult coding that he was the We cannot lie. Especially and a bunch of things that my god, I miss this. Uh value of thinking about what the is, how do we break it down, the customer, what the outcome is, do we make it part of the business we're just playing, right? developer before they became a dreamed of I would just code day when they reach enterprise or reach corporate like I'm mean all the time like yes because is part of the problem part of whole supply chain if you will but not the biggest part the same for agents now I it came today actually it was uh the blog one of the most anticipated blog about how did bun which is a nojs if you willish from zigg to rust how we prepare the whole code base patterns boring patterns that's what we're doing people say I don't code anymore I do anything and create a loop all this preparation because the starts fresh every time even if create a memory MD or whatever call these days has to know what good looks like was really looking forward to this post so I'm happy it's out it came out this I was [laughter] I on the commute I was like yes have to I have to read that as So has been comments that people said development working with there is so much work up front I would rather do it myself or I am manually and I think this work you do up front for me is like an right you invest early reap benefits months down the line it can be quite quickly if you're I'm not going to invest but I'm going to save and it's going to sit my bank account then yeah at some people are going to have bigger higher dividends reap of rewards on their they made early on. For me, is quite comparable. So, it's it's shame where I see people not investing not just their own workflow, but how this scale in teams or in or thinking and because right now experimenting. So, right now the time to experiment. I would say is the discussion we're having um in adjacent roles or SKs in places. So, you can use this. give an example for this. When you do an apply, one of the tasks at one the very few and at the end of the that we do is something called a decision log and we keep a a log every decision we made in the project the reason the why almost like an but a very lightweight one yesterday I created something I'm proud of as I still have two more create but now still thinking about do we think about open source at a forth it's called slash onboarding is command as a skew as you you will try to scan your for the likes of code owners, log, git branches, docs, opensp spec there's any or any spec for that and then we will give you a high review of how what's the of the project is what are main decisions what are the stable of the project unstable areas who the people that are likely know more this area that you should talk to then guide you through a on boarding. Do you know about this? you know some areas want to dive into this area do you me to create an interactive HTML you go from there so this usually pay off when you about teaming based and if you from an open source uh background always thinking how do I make it for someone to contribute also how do I make it harder for malicious to try to contribute they shouldn't be contributing begin with agents are not so different from this I also wanted to make it explicit is the first time where it's just just agent right running in a loop you mentioned it could be 10 minutes could be 2 hours have you thought of the agent runs is that locally on laptop is that remotely so can shut something down they don't to have their laptop open I see with people walking and their lid like a little bit open so the agent still run in these loops are your thoughts on that do everything locally today we have going on trying to run into remote machine and so forth but I say we're very early on this one it's not very different from remote machines. I used to work with companies uh back in the days uh broadcasting companies back in and some of those were used to remote developer machines as a way a safety measure. For instance, you everything down and so forth. But also creates a friction when it comes developer experience certain things can do. I don't think we're there yet. For all of this is running locally. They except the last parts where do additional review gates which it with a tool I'm really loving It's not a full endorsement by way. not sponsored. [laughter] called code rabbit. you want to sponsor me, let me know. Yeah. So those things are becoming and more useful now. What happened the CI site? And when you say local, is it still in some type of sandboxed or do people run the risk of loop kind of going ham? And we that by all the work up front. not neither of those. So it's still but one of the we're dealing with right? We're dealing with money, movement, and a bunch of things. we need to be very careful in what we tools like factory droids where can have enterprise governance for You can prohibit certain of commands, certain levels of should be used. Even if an agent you say prohibited or sometimes will say oh uh this is actually uh against by organizational policy need your explicit permission to be to run this for example. So there levels of these things for agentic workflows. Yeah, for that. give you an example. As soon as you using [laughter] agents and use and agent was like, "Yeah, me just delete this bot. Let me just this thing. need to [laughter] So you kind of can't. let me try to remove the entire of home directory." So you can't. so there are things that you can do with AI and enterprise with And factory droid is something from the open source droid harness, right? So the droid itself is the harness is kind of open source but all of companies now are investing into enterprise governance if you will code from DAX is the same idea as So harness is where you do all these things you but like any remote development in cloud you're going to to have policies somewhere. Interesting. I'm also going to into this. We we have been kind of local sandbox where we want people to comfort and more confidence running for longer times, right? If it's minutes, it's okay. You can still kind look at your screen and be like, is it doing?" But when we're about 2 hours, no one's going to for 2 hours and stare at the screen make sure it doesn't delete the home And if it does, you might be too late cuz you were sleeping. you want something in place. We heard stories about this, but I mean, you can you can use hooks literally every harness right now to some of those things, you're not dealing with if you're with a few developers, sure. But you're dealing with thousands of then the conversation different. I want to zoom into hooks since mentioned that. For me, let's let's with what what is a hook to to sure the listener understands. So, a hook similar to anything happens in your machine, it usually an event of a kind. Sometimes a log, sometimes an instruction to computer to follow and off of that off that event something will happen. So you're running an agent on your through open code, cloud code or or any of those things or factory there are certain decisions or if you will that those will be emitted. So before I run tool, after I run a tool or I'm the tool or something like this, can intercept that event and say on of the instruction you were meant to do this other thing. So for you can say before you return control to the user to say I've done run pre-commit hooks. So you know sure they're always going to be run But it's not a smart way to do it. A way to do is to do at the hook. So if git is going to a commit to this, it's going to tap a hook event that you can now run commands and to say abort this So the hook is basically driven but from a process from a point of view. And does it does a hook run when a is done or does it run with one of a loop? would it depends on where the one we just discussed. will be from an iteration of the you typically want to have your own baked if in in some ways. A loop nothing more but a hook in a way. For me, the the concept of hooks incredibly powerful. want my code to be easy, simple to I've said that many times. I've inspired by one of the guests to that. And you still want that when agent is performing the code for you, right? when you're doing it hands-on but when your is typing the code or generating code rather. So those conventions of quality standards specifically in repository or for a paved road for a technology I think we should that as much as we can in and hooks are a way to do right your linting or sgrip rules seen people do things with or sure there's certain security that are there or as much as can conventions so the code is more in terms of its quality architectural decisions in the end, I also feel like investment is going to pay because someone has to review code. And if you continuously have review structure, you're going to so much fatigue because we can go fast in generating code. But you have to review everything like was written from scratch by someone has no idea what they're doing and not adhere to any of the or it's more of a coin flip, yes, sometimes no, you lose edge and you lose your cognitive quite quickly. I'm smiling because the reason I spent this um the last months which I mentioned that was hardest to make it team based is I codify this exactly what mentioning now which is we're to call it at the end of this uh this image called slash retro. when we do this continuing this when do the implementation of it you do this ad hoc prompting if will to fix certain things you don't the way the test was structured. It matter how many SKs you have, it happen. It's bound to happen. And when the quality gaps are And that's when you start the trust a bit on whether he's what you're what you're supposed be doing, the quality gates and so Is this more deterministic? How you bring some of these things? The I'm solving this now is in two ways, checkpoints, not hook. run as part of the openspec plan we roughly 15 adversarial reviewers for changes are being made. So think is code being touched? You're going run a Python adversor reviewer go TypeScript same Postgress wait look the queries that are being created or at the DDLs that are being created the way creating tables already are changes this is going to cause loss the reviewer will be able to it. So you run all of these things but we can also run at the CI this will generate an attestation we do in in high stake releases I used to do in open source that release it would generate an in a provenence to prove all steps that it took to be able to that release to begin with the the jobs the environment variables and so forth all recorded and doing the same idea from for as a check to prevent agents to evidence that they run tests they did things that they were to do. So every change, every that you do would always have to a cycle of a review based on changes. So think you have a floor always running security reviews. They have to happen you're also going to have reviewers like is this if not touching Python, why would you it? If it's not touching why would you run it? So have this kind of a floors from and outcome verification and a conditional one that would run as things run and I have a scripts that would verify they actually run. Did they actually those any files the hooks and a few things if they did then we can an attestation with all the to test the findings the things need to be fixed and this gets at CI which premputes It's a bit more complex than but this is the simplest form I can That's why I'm calling a merge Once this happens, after we this whole development cycle, biggest learning I've had over the 6 months is you tend to forget that agents are doing everything for some of those things could be after you run a session for like four, seven hours, you're The last thing you want is to about what could this be a What could this be a custom or something or formatting rule? just forget. So I built a command expiration from an Icelandic from a friend of mine called / where you're having the same method looking at the last session or the session you just had and figured what is it that you had to course the agent because you went you went haywire or you do what you actually wanted to do things that you had to fix mentally you know the agents sometimes do that much as a good job. It or that it simply you don't know to make this more deterministic. what this retrocomand does is you. It looks into your whole and sessions and so forth and out these are all the threads I notice that we can have the We can dive into this and at end this is a table of everything could be made deterministic now everything else that could actually nondeterministic but more lightweight instructions or less something and is how I used to improve this whole of development to introduce a merge to introduce one reviewer at a to introduce custom linting roles introduce architecture guards to a file importing some other file shouldn't be because we're using and adapters and such. it kind of becomes a continuous was actually thinking since we've gone this and there are tidbits that want to put into practice myself first foremost, but I also think from a perspective, they might want try this out. Are you planning to source this? Is this available? can people find this? [laughter] is not yet open sourced. Uh, but I make a comment on YouTube video the fact uh with a sample of what is. uh but we are discussing ways of doing open source at engine not only this work there's retro on boarding I'm now doing when you're going when I go holidays for instance or when you just got back from vacation there's few little tricks that you can do or our own openspec custom workflow all this merge verification loops you will framework that I'm trying to looking into this but if you were try Now it's could be as simple as as [snorts] you are a agent in help me reflect and find for my development Your job is very simple to at into my context. Look into my session or my current session ask me if I have any notes or what wrong, what didn't go so well. me. Use socratic method. Find threads until there's nothing left. you have a better picture and you precisely there's no other topics or if the user says then create a table showing what could be made deterministic so user or us spend less effort less less frustrations because we a life outside job as well what is it that could be additions our nondeterministic ways of doing could be a reviewer could be else. So make it look nice and just a simple table that you can I user can ask questions if if needed that's basically what wet is like 30 if I'm honest but just that of having something that you you call at the end of a session or after two three sessions I don't keep notes somewhere on paper or I keep a note like uh retro.md out in home directories I keep notes of my my frustration and things "Oh my god, Opus was doing fine. happened here?" [laughter] It Um, and and I feed this later the retro and then he keeps an amazing things. I have to warn you that if you're a like I am, you're going to to keep running these retros for a time. And then sometimes you might to bring your pragmatism a bit more there's always going to be areas improve. There's always going to be to do things. But for me, my is moving from, oh, I love agents. I trust these agents. And agents are actually not doing the they're supposed to be doing. it goes into this trust and uh the of trust and recovery uh idea. And for you to get back to the baseline the trust you had, it never gets It will increase slowly as it right. But this idea of a retro moving. Maybe I could do a custom rule to prevent writing test way, writing code this way. I recently in Go that we have the CI uh linked tooling that you have dependency guard feature that retro me about and I was like yes you can this thing. So then this there's the will never happen and your binary less than 3 megabytes. I'm like let's just do it. So this is that's going to be highly So it goes back to the of if you ever worked in open before. It's an edge for you you're always trying to think of do I make it easier for someone to maybe the first time maybe How do I prevent malicious or even yourself in a bad day in tired day it will happen risk to get into your project. But we missed in open source was idea of I'm getting close to my end my day. My battery is running low and can remember these things. But you now a log of everything that happened. now I can use an agent to do what do best. Look up heaps of data, of things and find meaning there. this kind of self-inter looking at session logs and improving from I feel like I can do that. And if revert back in time, if I was doing when I was early in career, I feel this agent and this way of giving is going to have me make a lot decisions. A lot of decisions that I even have a clue on how to make, Oh, did you know X, Y, and Z? You do this in this llinter. I'm like, I didn't even know what we're right now. So, how much do I need use my own critical thinking or how can I let the agent kind of also me and inform me and kind of be guider there? What's your advice? would it would always be a a bit of right? I'll give an example that yesterday. Yesterday I was a I'm building an entire CI for GitLab because I I miss GitHub in certain aspects of Um I I wanted to have a way for anyone the company at agent to say include merge check includes as attestation make sure that the agent are not to you fabrication but it's to be just a single line. So but I also want to have protections alter code altering time to prevent part of the code should have no effects. There should be no calls, calls, io's should only be this is the hook I received or I received and add a label that be an action remove a label or then something else would the side effects makes it easier test make things testable. What the understood was okay sure no one line fine and then he an entire refactoring plan where was like all you need is two docker and all these different three different repositories like no [laughter] I like that thinking about docker images have self-contained but for there's three concerns here one of them is first how do I make it so easy they just include and that decision goes goes away. Second, how do I myself from accidentally editing that I shouldn't be editing? So, architecture that started well and became a spaghetti, but also how do prevent an agent to basically lie to and start editing these things they have free will to a degree, then the last one is how do I make deployment easier so it doesn't a burden for me to now maintain whole thing because complexity goes away. You're just shoving it else. I don't want to deal that complexity even though I'm to make it as easy as possible to user. If that's going to be an calculus, then I want to shift balance a bit more. And then that thinking has to happen. is where sometimes it's hard for engineers or engineers that haven't long enough or have made enough I made more than I can count. to be able to have this kind of a thinking look and then say agent you did great for now but do this. The way you can counter balance if you don't have enough of to have critical thinking or read enough code or to have enough hopefully don't have that many uh [clears throat] to run cycles of reviewers. So you can always for instance bring Fable and say use judgment to when to launch other model less capable models than you review the work that you're doing and bring from a security point of view a customer point of view and this something that I even accidentally that you can do this from a point of view as well. You can a PRD. You can create everything And you can say this is the type customer I'm trying to get you the or the segment. Create a customer for this, for this, this, for this, and review these then you get different findings and find what's common and then let's it. Yeah, not going to solve you not having critical thinking, but it's going to like an architect, your your main is trying to not only make everyone around you smarter, but also trying reduce the risk for that decision. you can do it with agents as well. I love that. Like even as you're this, you communicate that is something I figured out right? Or something that I and now I learned and then I it into practice. It really that a lot of what we learn and even what we communicate is so that it would be a shame to not things out and to experiment and to and to cuz I feel like earlier in engineering there was not as innovation for me. This is right a very cool time to start innovating start learning to see what you can and I've been having a lot of doing it to be honest. Yeah, think so as well. Yeah, I I I'm I'm so much because I think the more you have, the more dogmas you acrewue and then this age now it's actually we could do something was having this discussion again with friend of mine, principal engineer, guy. It's like I kind of look to him when it comes to rust like the genius of rust. of the things that he's doing, please uh forgive me for for sharing some of your work ahead of time. Uh, but looking at how do we make sure that have engineering design discussions a structured way in a way that you feed it to agents or you can do things for instance almost like a of record but heavier on tech. when I looked at the document with yesterday, one of the things that me was like this is very having this all of these things so thought out that you have to go and and have to go and write. But I know from open source that when see this they will fear they will away. they will just do the very or they will probably just use shachi pt gemini or whatever to just to write it down and then the cold thinking goes out the window we can do what about I I I showed this loop that we're just discussing what if we have a skill that uses piece or a command I think is than sq uses the pieces as a as a starting point but use method and makes this part of workflow so Then when you're trying do the first brainstorming or explore spec or whatever now you're resilience uh aspects to So now you're adding instant as part of this thing. So becomes natural now [snorts] this whole document gets produced them knowing this was goal to begin with. Yeah. to open source power tools. The point is for people to just this so much easier to use. Add a logger. I got structure logging. Once you a correlation ID, just add this And now at the end when they oh yeah, I'm doing all this. I even know it. is the aha moment that I I wish we move more towards. definitely some there should be behavior psychology there because also noticed that if you give the end result, if the end result perfect and they don't trust it, it's going to fly, right? But if you people tools and they create that result themselves, they build by because they're in the their critical thinking is used, are building their own conviction doing, then they really believe in end result and all of a sudden you automatic buy in. That was the goal the first place is like you're good go. much. And that's the whole point started the conversation about um sometimes focus so much on the skills, which is truly necessary. have to, especially agents, you have know that they're lying. They're up with suboptimal results. But you start going studying adjacent this is where you start yourself. And agents are to augment you. But first, you to augment yourself with all of skills. So then you can reach much higher heights. Ira, thanks so much for coming on sharing. problem. This is great. Yeah, for having me. was the first time we did something this, something visual on screen. let me know in the comment section you thought and we'll see you in the next one.